- Tonight, "Forged in Fire"
brings twice the heat,
twice the blood,
sweat, and tears,
as four top bladesmiths
compete alongside
their apprentices
in the ultimate
team challenge.
- There! Yeah!
- Each pair will be tested
like never before...
- Grind it.
[bleep] it. Grind it.
- And they'll either
work together...
- Really done well.
- Or go down in flames.
- We don't have time
to [bleep] around.
- With double the stakes
and $10,000 on the line,
who will be crowned
the "Forged in Fire"
ultimate team champions?
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
- My name's Joe Calton,
I'm 39 years old,
and I'm from Cheyenne, Wyoming.
- I'm Casey Perdue.
I like working with Joe.
He lets you make
your own mistakes,
but he also shows you
how to correct them.
He said a Mastersmith
means nothing
other than you made
all the mistakes
and figured out
how to fix 'em.
- I'm Raleigh Desiato.
I've been making blades
for 12 years,
horseshoe knives mainly.
- And I am Kelly Gregory.
I have been making blades
seriously for a year.
- Kelly's such a bad cat.
When you work with somebody,
you get, like, this--your own
little, like, language.
Dude, we are, like,
totally telepathic,
ESPN, or whatever.
- We are gonna kick
everybody's ass.
- And we do the--
[both imitate explosion]
- My name is Tyler Adkins.
I'm also known as Iron Man.
I've been bladesmithing
for 12 years.
- I'm Leon Vanguard.
2005 is when
I first met Iron Man.
I had to call his house.
I asked for Iron Man,
and the person
on the phone goes, "Who?"
I went, "Skinny white guy
that likes metal."
She goes, "Tyler!"
- Yep. Yeah, that was my mom.
- My name is Mark J. Hopper.
I teach smithing
in Atlanta, Georgia.
- My name is
Jessica D. Collins,
and I've been apprenticing
with Mark for 4 years.
Eventually, I got good enough
to help him actually
design the classes.
- This is almost at that point
when a master
turns to his apprentice
and goes, "It's time
to become a journeyman."
- Bladesmiths,
welcome to The Forge.
The eight of you
will be competing
for the title of
"Forged in Fire" champion
and checks for $10,000,
all in front of our panel
of expert judges:
Two-time "Forged in Fire"
champion, Ben Abbott;
historic weapons re-creation
specialist, David Baker;
edged weapons specialist,
Doug Marcaida.
On your anvils is a cloth.
Remove it.
♪ ♪
That is a 2x6 round of W1,
from which you will
forge your blades.
And not signature blades.
Instead, we're kicking things
up a notch.
Today, you will forge
an iconic weapon of warfare:
the trench knife.
- Cool, we're making
trench knives!
What the [bleep]'s
a trench knife?
- The trench knife
was developed
for U. S. World War I troops
in need of a versatile
weapon to employ
in the hand-to-hand
combat they faced
while raiding enemy trenches.
Featuring a pointed blade
and four-fingered guard,
or knuckle duster,
the weapon was used
for stabbing,
slashing, and punching.
The solid steel knuckle duster
prevented enemies
from seizing the knife,
and could be used
like brass knuckles
to issue devastating blows.
Your knives must include
an integral handle
made from the same piece
of steel as the blade.
You must include
four finger holes.
Keep in mind that
in the second round,
you'll be putting scales
on those handles
to turn them into
fully functional weapons
that will be tested
for strength and durability
in a fuel can stab,
and for sharpness
in a fire hose slice.
You will have four hours
in which to complete this,
but only one of you can be
working the steel at a time,
so we will rotate
at 30 minute intervals.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
Apprentices, you're up first.
Your four-hour forging time
starts...
now.
♪ ♪
- Get as many bricks
into your fire as possible.
- Pick up a hammer,
get a good feel for it.
Which one
are you gonna use first?
- So are the masters
stuck in one place?
- They're supposed to
stay in their slot.
- A lot of bodies, hot steel.
Safety is paramount.
♪ ♪
- Get it back in there.
Go find some bigger tongs.
We're so used to forging
against the clock,
being in horseshoeing
contests...
- This one?
- There you go!
That it's kind of
old rap for us, I think.
- It's fun.
- Yeah, it's fun.
- It's what we do for fun.
Hey, can you block
the outside up a little bit?
- Yeah, I can.
- And then open up
your tools here.
Am I being too bossy?
- No, no, keep talking.
- Longer footsteps!
You gotta let it press.
There! Yeah!
- I see a lot of, uh,
intense coaching from Raleigh.
- There you go!
Yeah!
[laughter]
That's [bleep] awesome.
- How long should I wait?
About 30 seconds?
- No, don't time it.
Look. Always look.
Well, Leon is up first...
- [chuckles]
- And that poses a challenge,
because I didn't have a chance
to prep anything on this one.
- Said you were gonna prep it.
You said you're gonna prep it.
- [laughs]
You're gonna need
some mechanical help.
- I'm a little nervous,
'cause I have never worked with
power hammers before.
- Up! Down! Up! Down!
- It's actually drying out.
I love this.
Power tools.
- Good job, Leon.
- Thank you.
- Good job.
You did--you're doing good.
- I am a little nervous
that I have to go first.
- Just break it down
as far as you can.
- I want to get this thing
into the perfect position
for Mark to start the isolation
on the handle and blade.
- Look at Jessica's
billet, man.
It is beautiful.
- I have never made
a trench knife.
Mark has the experience.
He's been doing it
a lot longer than I have.
- Would you give me
a 5-inch mark there as well?
- I'm gonna follow his lead.
- Switch!
- And the master's on.
♪ ♪
- Casey did amazing
in the first round,
set us up real good,
got us a good handle on.
He did great.
- Okay, power hammer's
almost clear. Go.
- I'll go ahead and draw it
out and get a point on it
before I hand it
back off to him.
♪ ♪
- I think one of our
biggest advantages will be,
we have fun no matter what.
It doesn't matter
if we're messing something up,
or building the most beautiful
blade you've ever seen,
we have fun either way.
No one else has a point.
- They don't?
Well, they better
put one on there.
- That's the "point"
of the show.
Ha-ha.
- Kelly.
Kelly... Kelly!
- Yeah!
- Kelly got us
pretty well sorted out.
Now it's my job to do something
about these finger holes...
Right there?
- Yeah.
- Because I'm not
real sure about them.
I've never made any.
- All we have to do
is have the holes big enough
so we can get our
fingers through, though.
- We need to get their freaking
big old fingers through.
The approach
for the finger holes,
I'm gonna just
drift them in...
Whoo! Yes, ma'am.
Yeah, I got your back.
And then, we'll file them
and grind them into shape.
- Nice!
- Look at Raleigh hammer.
We got a farrier
with a vengeance.
- I just wanted
to hit something!
- Switch!
You have just
three hours remaining
to finish your work!
- Good luck.
- That's too far in, I think,
'cause that steel
is gonna want to
get stretched out.
- We start out by punching
prick marks in our handle
for our knuckle spacing.
- How does that look?
- I don't know,
I've never made one.
You can almost break your
knuckle on a knife like this,
if your holes don't line up.
- Knuckle dusters
have a curve to it.
Those finger holes have to
be in an arc fashion.
Otherwise,
it's gonna open your hand.
Cutting with that
is gonna be a problem.
- Easy, easy!
If there aren't four holes
to where it's comfortable,
I mean, if they're too small,
and the judge
can't get his hands in,
they'll send us home.
- Switch!
♪ ♪
- That was very nicely set up.
Thank you so much.
- Anytime, chum.
- Jessica, she's my left
and my right arm.
I joke that she's my Alfred,
and I'm Batman,
so I get to run around
in the rubber outfit
and underpants on the outside,
and she keeps
everything together
and makes sure it flows.
- Both our apprentices
and our masters
have had two turns each
at the anvil,
and there's only one team
that has yet to drift
any finger holes.
- Our plan right now
for our finger holes
is to use this piece of steel.
We're gonna give it little
M shapes, as it goes through,
and it's gonna be
half of our handguard.
The other half of
the holes inside here
are gonna be ground in
for the hand.
So it's a two-piece connection
that we're gonna
weld together.
- All I'm thinking is,
"Show me an M."
I just need to see an M.
I wanna see that
if I get to this right now,
that I have loops to
weld to a handle.
Oh, that's interesting.
To open up their holes,
they're using the horn...
- Yeah.
- And a pike. Like it.
- Yeah, they're drifting
their holes just like they are.
They're drifting holes too.
We're the only ones
that it's gonna weld.
- How does it make you feel?
- Makes me feel
freaking amazing.
- Just--I just wanna see the M.
[chuckles]
Show me an M.
- Switch!
Half your time
has already elapsed!
- Make sure you got it
real secure in there, Kel.
Start grinding that [bleep].
- Ooh-ah,
she's already on to grinding.
♪ ♪
- I need a Band-Aid.
- You okay?
- Yep, I'm good.
I just need a Band-Aid.
- Uh-oh.
- Oh...
- That's a lot of blood.
- It's not a cut.
It's a tear.
- We've got the medic
coming in.
- It's good.
No, no, I don't have time.
No, no, it's not blood.
No. Please, no.
I get a cut worse than this
every single day.
It was way too far from
my heart to kill me.
I just need to keep working.
I don't have time.
I don't have time for this.
You okay?
- Yep, I'm good.
I just need a Band-Aid.
- Uh-oh.
- Oh...
- That's a lot of blood.
- No, no, I don't have time.
No, no, it's not blood.
No. Please, no.
The grinder attacked me.
[laughs]
- [laughs]
- Just give me
a Band-Aid right there.
That's all I need.
It's not bad.
- Kelly over there,
it look likes
she messed up her finger
pretty bad.
- And she's still
trying to work.
- I don't wanna
leave the floor.
It was just
a little bloody cut.
I broke my foot in four places
and shod ten horses
afterward.
I just need to keep working.
♪ ♪
I don't have time.
I don't have time for this.
- All right.
- Thanks.
- Yeah, it'll be all right.
- We don't even think about it
when the other one's bleeding.
I'm like, she's gotta
keep working through it.
That's what we do
for each other.
Yeah, we don't worry about
little flesh wounds
around here.
It's all good.
- Switch!
- Kelly,
we better [bleep] hope
that we can rasp this.
We should've checked.
I'm grinding on this blade,
and all of a sudden,
I start thinking,
"This blade's pretty hard."
We might be in trouble,
because I'm not sure
our plan to rasp out
these holes is gonna go
as easily as planned.
Ah, I should've
punched them bigger.
- We underestimated
the work hardness of a W1.
Hand rasping's not easy.
- If we don't get these
finger holes sorted out,
so that the judges
can fit their fingers in,
we're gonna have a problem.
- Switch!
- Our plan was to make a guard
in an M shape like this.
Show me the M!
Um, the steel
wasn't moving at all...
- At all.
- When it does move,
it's in giant arcs.
- Trying to get
this piece of steel
to move into the M shape
that we just--
for the last three
revolutions of our turns,
we just cannot get into shape.
♪ ♪
Grind it. [bleep] it.
Grind it. Flatten that out.
Grind all four holes.
We don't have time.
- They just took all the bend
out of it they put in it.
- So I'm looking at the clock.
I'm freaking out.
We don't have a handle.
Yeah, grind it!
[blade whirs]
We want four channels!
One, two, three, four, boom.
- And he is now
grinding into his handle.
- They've come up with an idea.
Now, if they were to grind
the loops into that billet,
they could just
weld those across.
That would really
look like hell,
but that could work.
♪ ♪
- Switch!
There are only 30 minutes
remaining in this round!
♪ ♪
- There we go.
- Oh! Quenched.
- Mark just quenched.
- Ran my file down it.
There is that little moment
where I feel my stomach
coming up.
- It's hard,
but it's not that hard.
- Yeah,
that's what I'm feeling.
I'm going for one more.
All I can do is
take another quench,
see how it comes out.
- Use the small contact wheel.
- I'm looking at the clock.
I've got 30 minutes.
I don't have time
to [bleep] around anymore.
I cannot teach Leon
anything else.
I have to focus
on this blade right now.
Otherwise,
we aren't gonna make it.
[bleep] it, we're welding now.
We just gotta get it to work.
Just weld it to it
until it's done.
That's the only thing
on my mind,
just get something
to the judges.
♪ ♪
- Joe and Casey
are in the quench.
- The blade is quenched...
Sounds hard.
- Sounds hard to me.
- We're letting it come to
temperature in the oil.
♪ ♪
- There you go, my friend.
- [chuckles] What?
- Oh, you knuckleheads!
- Oh, no way.
- Finally somebody
brings a snack.
- Joe snuck marshmallows
all the way here from Wyoming,
and guess what...
it will toast.
♪ ♪
- Tyler has quenched.
Here we go.
Five, four,
three, two, one!
Bladesmiths,
shut down your machines,
drop your tools!
This first round of
competition is over!
- That was fun.
- We're hoping
for somebody else
to have messed up
finger holes too.
That's what we want.
- [chuckles]
- We're wishing bad crap
on other people.
- Bad karma, sorry.
- Sorry, guys.
- We can make those
look really pretty
with a little extra time.
- Yeah.
- I don't think it said that
the holes had
to be pretty yet.
- No, there was nothing
in the rules about--
- It had to be hard.
That was--it had to be hard.
- Exactly.
- Masters and apprentices,
it's time for the judges
to take a look at your work.
Raleigh, Kelly, please present
your blade to the judges.
♪ ♪
- That's a heck of a knife.
I don't see
any kind of cracking
or problems
with the steel itself.
But the big thing is
these holes are pretty small.
I'd really like to see these
holes opened up a little bit.
- No one swings hammers
like farriers do,
but remember, one of
these tests is a stab test,
and it's a very wide point
for a stab.
- Joe, Casey,
your team's up next.
♪ ♪
- Man,
that's an aggressive design.
It's just really intimidating.
Designed for cutting
marshmallows.
[light laughter]
I put this in my hand,
it's not comfortable yet,
but I can see it getting there
once this webbing's
taken care of.
All in all,
I think you did a great job.
Well done.
- Tyler and Leon,
you guys are up next.
- In a competition
where the defining part
of this design
is all about the handle,
it's unfinished,
and I can't even get my fingers
to make it workable
at this stage,
and that's very important
when we're talking about
the trench knife.
- Mark, Jessica,
you're up next.
♪ ♪
- It was a pleasure
to watch you guys work.
The shape of this
is phenomenal.
It's got an aggressive point
for stabbing.
Your finger holes
are comfortable
and well placed.
But, uh...
there's a crack.
You can see it here,
and you can also see it
on the other side.
It's an unfortunate thing.
- All right, bladesmiths,
while we go into deliberation,
I'm gonna have you lay
your blades here on this table
and step back
towards your anvils.
♪ ♪
- When they said
it was cracked,
I was like, "Shoot,
they had the nicest blade."
My heart fell for you.
- I can't even figure out
where it came in.
- All right, judges,
it's time to discuss
who's going home
and who gets to stay.
- In my mind,
certainly Raleigh and Kelly
and Joe and Casey.
These guys are moving forward,
without a doubt.
And then,
it's between Tyler and Leon
and Mark and Jessica.
- We're gonna start
with Tyler and Leon.
- [sighs]
- I just don't see four hours
of work on this blade.
It just--it's not as refined
as a lot of the other ones.
I can't get a fingertip
into this hole.
This is very square.
In a knuckle duster, you'd like
to see some curvature to it,
and this is just not that.
- I like the fact
that they came up with
another idea for achieving
what we wanted,
but they didn't really have
a plan on how to finish it,
and that shows.
The fact that this blade
is a half-inch thick almost,
and there's no definition
in the spine whatsoever.
I seriously have doubts
on whether or not
they're going to have
enough time in round two
to do the things
they need to do
to take care of their blade.
- All right, let's move on
to Mark and Jessica.
♪ ♪
- First off,
it's a gorgeous knife,
but the big thing for me is,
there are cracks.
I mean, there's a crack here.
It follows through to here.
- We've talked about this
on cracked knives before,
what's called a bell stop,
where you put a hole
at either end of that crack,
so it can't travel anywhere.
- Right.
- The question is,
will they know how to fix it?
- Doug, have you made
your final decision?
- Yes, I have.
- Dave, you've made yours?
- Ben?
- Yeah.
- All right.
Let's go tell our smiths.
Bladesmiths, our judges have
completed their deliberation.
It's time for one of you teams
to leave The Forge.
♪ ♪
It's time for one of
you teams to leave The Forge.
♪ ♪
Leon and Tyler.
Your blade did not
make the cut.
- Tyler, Leon,
I really appreciate the fact
that you guys came up with
a complete different direction
for putting those holes,
but in the execution,
you just ran out of time.
At the end, your knife
just isn't nearly as finished
as any of our others,
and that's why
we're letting you go.
- Tyler, Leon, please,
surrender your weapon.
- This is my first time
using a power hammer,
so the fact that
I was able to give Iron Man
an actual nice piece
of steel to work with,
I was very happy.
- This is his sixth knife,
and he did it
in front of the whole world.
I'm extremely proud of Leon.
♪ ♪
- Congratulations,
bladesmiths,
you've made it to
the second round.
And now that your blades
have been tempered,
it's time to turn them into
fully functional
combat trench knifes,
by attaching
handle scales to them,
using the range of materials
provided in our pantry.
You will have three hours
in which to complete your work.
Now, I remind you that you will
work in 30 minute intervals,
apprentices starting first.
After this round's time is up,
your blades will be tested
for strength and durability
in a fuel can stab,
and for sharpness
in a fire hose slice.
Good luck.
Your time starts... now.
♪ ♪
- If you drill out
there and there,
I think that's gonna help
a lot of our problems.
Our biggest challenge
this round is
to fix our freaking messed up
finger holes, man.
- Yeah.
- There's nothing worse than
having your fingers spread out
on something that you're
trying to use as a weapon.
- Right.
Can injure the user.
♪ ♪
- If you've got a crack,
you don't fix it.
both: Throw it away.
- Start again.
♪ ♪
Once we've got
the handle figured out.
- First, I'm going to
widen those finger loops.
- My instruction to Jess is,
make it feel like
a kit glove.
Bring that one in a little bit.
That's gonna help.
Jess's hands are smaller.
She's gonna be more aware
of that pinching
between the fingers,
which is kind of a good thing
in some ways.
♪ ♪
- I'm putting
a skull crusher in,
because Doug thinks it'll kill.
No one had one,
so I thought,
"We have enough meat there.
Why not add one,
give it a little extra flair?"
If I had to pick a knife
to bring to a gun fight...
- This one wouldn't be
a bad choice.
- Switch!
- Oh, that's ebony.
First thing I do when I take
the blade back from Casey
is start setting up
for the handle.
- We noticed a piece of
white paper Micarta.
- It'll be a good strong
handle material.
♪ ♪
- We're still struggling
with the holes.
There comes a point where
you gotta just do your best,
and you've gotta move on
to the next thing...
Still gotta get
the handle on it.
So that's what
we're going after now.
- Switch!
- Raleigh, I need a decision--
- What?
I don't [bleep] care, dude.
Just grab that.
- Seems very brittle.
- It's fine. I just wanna
get a handle on there.
♪ ♪
- Lovely. Nice job.
We know we've got
the weird finger loops done.
- And now I just focus
all of my thought
on getting that handle shaped.
- So, I want you
to consider that as a circle.
There we go. And come all
the way out to the far edge.
- I'm really impressed
with this relationship.
It is a true form of
master and apprentice.
Switch!
- Now we've gotta figure out
what to do about that crack.
It's a huge problem.
- They're seeing if they can
grind out the cracks.
- You add heat to that thing,
and that crack
is going to enlarge.
- Seeing some headshaking
from Mark over there...
- Oh, yeah.
- It's as good
as I'm gonna get it.
I'm not gonna even deal
with those cracks.
There's no point in it.
- I wanna get this thing glued
sooner than later.
- It's been taking Raleigh
a bit of time
to get this handle together.
- We're having
a hard time recovering
from our finger holes.
Our handle looks like bad poo,
but part of competing is
you just gotta take your lumps,
and you gotta
go on with things.
- Switch!
- The other day, Casey made
his first large knife.
There's a whole new skill set
to learn there.
- How fast do you run
one of these?
- And now,
we need to grind the bevels.
Here's your chance.
Get to practicing.
♪ ♪
Take your time. Chill out.
- May not be the most
opportune time
to practice a skill
you just learned a week ago,
but no time like the present,
so I hopped on that
belt sander and gave her hell.
- [chuckles]
That's gorgeous.
- You have only half an hour
left in this competition.
Masters, you're batting
cleanup, so make it count.
- Right now, we just have to
make a beautiful thing.
Let's put a fantastic
handle on it.
- I think Jessica
is glad to be done
with the working portion
of this for her.
Now she's just gotta
cheerlead her master,
and wait and see what happens.
- We've just got to make
a beautiful knife,
put it in the hands
of the gods.
- Yeah.
- I know the finger holes
weren't finished,
but I see that hamon
in the blade,
and nothing brings
that kinda stuff out
like a hand-sanded finish.
- That doesn't look like
a whole lot of fun right there.
- You just wait
and see what it does.
- I'm sure it's gonna be
beautiful.
♪ ♪
- Ten, nine,
eight, seven,
six, five,
four, three,
two, one!
Bladesmiths, drop your tools.
Stop what you're doing.
This second round of
competition is over.
♪ ♪
- I'm trying to ignore the fact
that there are cracks,
but damn, she looks good.
- Bladesmiths,
this is the strength test,
the fuel can stab.
I'm gonna use your knives
to stab holes
in these fuel cans five times.
Remember, it's not what your
knives do to the fuel cans,
but what the fuel cans
do to your knives.
Raleigh, Kelly, you're up
first. Are you ready?
- Yes.
- Yes, sir.
- We're really excited
for the toughness test.
We fixed that point on it.
It's definitely stabbier.
And we're really excited
to see what's gonna happen.
♪ ♪
- [laughing]
- Hey...
[laughter]
♪ ♪
- Raleigh, Kelly,
this is quite a knife.
Got a nice point
for penetration.
But there's some chipping here.
The very point is still
as sharp as it was
when you made it,
but, uh, there's no denying
there was a little chip
on the edge here.
Joe, Casey, you guys are up.
Are you ready?
- Oh, yeah.
- Let's do it.
This is what
me and Joe live for,
making knives and just
testing them to destruction.
- What's the use
of making something
if you can't find out
where its limits are?
♪ ♪
- Well, Joe, Casey,
your edge held up perfectly,
but this handle...
[chuckles] Hurts.
What I ended up with
was a position
that made my pinkie
take a lot of the force.
The holes, it just needed
to be closer together
and a little taller,
but, uh, that edge,
it's perfect.
- Thanks.
- Thank you.
Mark, Jessica, you ready?
- Indeed.
That chip on Raleigh
and Kelly's blade,
it's making me think
heavily about ours.
We know we've got
that cracking in there,
something that
we did not address.
- This could end up being
a beautiful paperweight
that shatters on the floor.
- Several paperweights.
It's to the gods now.
♪ ♪
Ben's ready
to test our blade.
We know we've got
that cracking in there,
something that
we did not address.
It's to the gods now.
♪ ♪
Poked holes. [laughs]
- [exhales]
- Well, Mark, Jessica,
your edge held up beautifully.
Those surface cracks
we saw in round one
held together.
Well done on the handle.
This is the only one
that I could get
my hand all the way in
and hold it with strength,
and it allowed me
to penetrate very deeply.
Overall, very well done.
That's quite a trench knife.
- It didn't blow up.
- It didn't blow up at all.
It's still one piece.
- Up next is
the sharpness test,
and for that,
I give you to Dave.
♪ ♪
[laughter]
- All right, bladesmiths,
to test the sharpness
of your blade,
this is all about what your
blades do to these fire hoses.
Raleigh, Kelly, you ready?
- Yes, sir.
♪ ♪
[both imitate explosion]
- All right, Raleigh, Kelly,
you made a sharp knife.
There was no resi--well,
I can't say
there was no resistance
by the mark on
my little finger right there.
My little finger
is being pushed so far back
by that webbing right there.
If that were a little bit
further forward,
it might actually be
almost comfortable.
All right, Joe, Casey,
you're up. You ready?
- Oh, yeah.
- Let's do it.
- Okay.
♪ ♪
- Good job.
- Thanks.
- Joe, Casey,
beautiful, sharp edge.
I love the look of this,
but that little finger
is murder.
Man, I wish you had spent
a little bit more time
grinding out that ring.
♪ ♪
All right, Mark, Jessica,
you ready?
- Yes.
- Indeed.
- Okay.
♪ ♪
- Ooh.
- [exhales]
- That is... incredibly sharp.
I actually was through the hose
before I realized I'd hit it.
And those surface cracks
haven't opened up
or affected the performance
of your blade at all.
Let's get to your handle.
I can adjust this
any way I want.
The finger holes
are big enough.
There's height in them.
Good job.
- Thank you so much.
- Thank you.
♪ ♪
- All right, bladesmiths,
the judges have completed
their deliberation,
and they've made
a final decision.
It's time for one of
these teams to leave The Forge.
The team leaving
The Forge is...
♪ ♪
Raleigh and Kelly.
Your blade
did not make the cut.
- Raleigh, Kelly,
you guys brought
so much energy and fun.
It's not an easy challenge.
But at the end of the day,
there's only one blade here
that hurt the user
and took edge damage.
It's for this reason
your team's going home.
- Kelly, Raleigh,
please surrender your blade.
♪ ♪
- I don't like it.
I don't like it when I don't
know how to do something.
I'm going home.
I'm gonna make
some of them trench knives,
and I'm gonna be,
like, the queen
trench knife maker.
What you think, Kel?
- I think that I'm just gonna
work on regular knives.
♪ ♪
- All right, bladesmiths,
you've made it into
the final round.
However, your work
is not over yet.
We're sending you back
to your home forges
to re-create an iconic weapon
from history.
That weapon is...
♪ ♪
The Chinese Dao.
Referred to as "The Courage
of All Soldiers,"
the Dao is one of
China's oldest
and most revered
edged weapons.
For over 3,000 years,
this single-edged sword
was carried into war
by Chinese cavalry.
The blade's slight curve
offered its user
superior thrusting
and chopping power,
while its concave guard
prevented enemy blood
from dripping onto the handle.
Mounted soldiers
favored the weapon
for its ease of use
on horseback.
Often wielded at a gallop,
the sword could fatally
sever enemy limbs
with little resistance.
Today, the Dao's legacy
lives on through its use
in martial art forms
like tai chi,
and in Chinese films
like "Brotherhood of Blades."
Your blade parameters
are as follows:
The length of the blade
must fall between
26 and 28 inches.
Your handle must include
a ring pommel and guard.
- I only ever forged two things
in the knife world
that are above 24 inches.
I just hope our skills
can pull us through.
- You will have five days
at your home forge
to accomplish this, but just
like rounds one and two,
only one of you can work
at the anvil at a time.
And you will rotate each day.
After five days,
you will return
and present your Chinese Daos
to our panel of expert judges,
and only after they've
brutally tested them
will they declare
one of your teams
the "Forged in Fire" champions
and hand you that check
for ten grand.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
We'll see you in five days.
- Congratulations.
♪ ♪
- I've never used this one.
- [chuckles]
[blade whirs]
Casey's never forged
a blade this length,
but, hey, just 'cause you've
never done something before
doesn't mean you can't do it.
- I'm really excited
to build this Chinese Dao.
It's an oversized chopper with
an elegant, pretty handle.
♪ ♪
At our thickest point,
2 and an 8.
- The challenging part
on this blade, I think,
is gonna be the thinness of it,
and getting the weight down
to where I feel
the judges are gonna be
comfortable testing it.
So, the game plan
is forge thick,
and then we'll take
that meat out
when it comes to grinding.
- I like working by hand more.
I feel like
I have more control.
But the best thing
about the power hammer
is that it saves time.
- [bleep].
Now that's a problem.
♪ ♪
We busted that off.
We've only got five hours
to work today,
and the power hammer failing,
that kind threw
a monkey wrench into it.
♪ ♪
- We've made it
to the final round,
probably by the skin
of our teeth.
[laughs]
I've never made
a precision weapon
like this before.
- That's the scary part.
- Yeah.
♪ ♪
I'm going to do my best
to forge out
the entire blade profile,
so that Mark is
set up well for tomorrow
going into quench.
- This is strange for us,
because I literally
can't do anything.
♪ ♪
- [groans, chuckles]
Driving me nuts.
This is the hardest days' work
that I've ever had
in my life...
- [chuckles]
- And I haven't picked up
a ruddy hammer.
- [chuckles]
♪ ♪
- Joe gave me a rundown on
how to fix the power hammer,
instead of me pounding out
by hand, and I'm glad he did,
because that was kind of
a stupid thought.
I think I left Joe
in a pretty good spot.
- We're going for the gorgeous
girl-next-door look
with a touch of makeup on.
- That's right.
I'm very excited to see Joe
take this blade
to the next level.
I can't wait to see how
the quench is gonna turn out.
- The quenching is
nerve-wracking.
If you tilt it,
if you turn it,
it can cause a blade that
normally wouldn't warp to warp.
♪ ♪
It looks absolutely gorgeous.
Now I've gotta thin
the blade down quite a bit.
It's supposed to be
nice and light.
If I grind it too thin,
and the edge buckles
the second
it hits something hard,
then obviously, they'll like it
because it's light,
and then they'll hate it
because the edge got deformed.
So what I'm looking at
is a nice even balance here,
so that this blade
will sail through
whatever it is that
they put in front of it.
What do you think, Casey?
- Not bad for an amateur.
- Really?
♪ ♪
- Here we go.
Finally in hand.
- Awesome.
- Jessica's put me
in a fantastic place.
Now I would like to get
working into the guard.
♪ ♪
I've got a belt buckle.
I'd actually like
to use that as the guard,
but turn the knot
inwards towards the blade
so it's almost invisible.
It'd be like one of
those little peek details.
Now, time to quench.
I've been quite nervous
about the quench.
It's very thin.
And I'm just expecting
this thing to turn into
a floppy noodle on me.
It's now or never.
♪ ♪
This could all go
to hell right now.
♪ ♪
You're in the hands
of the gods.
♪ ♪
- Everything is
smooth sailing,
and then a bomb is dropped.
- [bleep].
I've been quite nervous about the quench.
It's very thin.
And I'm just expecting
this thing to turn into
a floppy noodle on me.
♪ ♪
Put it between some wood,
drop an anvil
on top of the wood.
♪ ♪
It's so straight.
- [laughs] Yay.
♪ ♪
- There's my apprentice.
- I think I left Joe
in a good spot.
He got the guards
completely done.
Handle scales, done.
- I got a nice tight fit
up in here.
Casey rocked the shop
yesterday,
and I am excited
to start this final assembly,
and make it look like a sword.
♪ ♪
- This is the job
of every good apprentice.
You sit in the EasyChair,
eat Trail Mix.
Isn't that
what we're supposed to do?
- Casey wanted to inlay
pins in the ring,
one for each of
the competitors,
so we're gonna have two pins
that hold the pommel
to the tang,
and then six more pins
in the ring on the bottom.
- I think it turned out
amazing.
It's gonna slice and dice
anything they swing it at.
♪ ♪
- And there is no edge damage.
- Today, I am pretty tired,
but there's still
work to be done.
I need to get the ring pommel
in the back.
♪ ♪
Turns out there was a gap.
It's very, very stressful.
- Okay...
- If I can't get
this pommel fitted on,
then... that $10,000,
losing it could be my fault.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths,
welcome back to The Forge.
You've had five days
at your home forges
to work on your Chinese Dao.
Joe, Casey,
tell us a little bit about
how your blade is constructed.
- Our blade's at a 51-60.
We put a hidden tang
handle on it,
and then a ring pommel
with eight brass pins in it.
Smooth and easy.
- All right, Mark, Jessica,
how'd it go for you all?
- It was a little bit of
a mad scamper at the end,
but it went pretty smoothly.
It's a full-tang construction.
And then we have
a small spacer
and a threaded rod
holding the ring on.
- All right.
Your weapons will now be put
through a series
of three tests.
Doug?
- This is the kill test.
To see what kinda lethal damage
your blade will do,
we're gonna deliver
some slashes
on this wild boar carcass.
Joe, Casey, you're up first.
Are you ready?
both: Oh, yeah.
- This is kinda the moment
it's all been boiling down to,
and I'm excited
to see how it performs.
Fist bump?
- Fist bump.
- We're psyched.
- I would love
to wield your weapon,
but I'm still healing
from an injury,
so I'd like to bring in
Anthony Palmer...
♪ ♪
And today, he will be my arm.
Have fun.
♪ ♪
All right, Joe, Casey,
off the bat, it is light.
You got the weight perfect.
On the draw-cut right here,
you can see
that it lacerated easily.
The cut here in the spine,
you can see
all the nice pieces of bacon
that we're gonna make later on
with this particular carcass.
Your blade, it will kill.
Good job, gentlemen.
- Thank you.
- Mark, Jessica,
you're up next. You ready?
- Definitely.
- Absolutely.
- Let's do this.
- Joe and Casey
got right up into
that ham heart.
- That cut into the ham.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, it went deep.
- Yeah, that was
all the way to the bone.
If we can perform
as good as that, I'm happy.
♪ ♪
[both chuckling]
- All right, Mark, Jessica,
now, your blade is wider,
but the balance is light.
In this particular slice,
almost cut in half,
but definitely
on the final cut,
glided easily.
Your blade,
it's curvaceous and sexy,
and it will kill.
- [chuckles]
both: Thank you.
- Next up is the strength test.
Ben?
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths, I'm gonna
take each of your swords
and deliver one
Herculean strike
on this piece of sheet metal
to see how it affects
your blade.
Joe, Casey, you're up.
You ready?
both: Oh, yeah.
- We love to test blades,
and it's killing us right now
to not run over to Ben
and grab the sword
from his hand.
♪ ♪
- This is a beautifully
light sword.
It's very well balanced.
I like the string
wrapped handle.
It's easy to keep
a good grip on it.
The edge took
a little bit of dulling.
There's a piece
of the sheet metal
almost welded onto your blade
from the impact,
but it's still very well done.
both: Thank you.
- Mark, Jessica, you guys
are up. You ready?
- Indeed.
- All right.
- After seeing Joe and Casey's,
I'm thinking,
"Did I over-harden it?
Is it going to break?"
My heart is in my throat.
- It's terrifying.
♪ ♪
Ben is about to do
something to this blade
that should never be done.
- Slamming it
into a steel plate.
- Steel--[chuckles, sighs]
- Dear Lord.
Why would you do that?
♪ ♪
- Mark, Jessica, this is
a beautiful sword to wield.
It's so comfortable.
It's so well balanced.
The steel did a little number
on your sword, though.
There's a chip right there.
But, uh, for such
a light and fast weapon
as both of these are, actually,
it's amazing that
they got away this unscathed.
Very well done.
both: Thank you.
- Next up
is the sharpness test,
and for that,
I'll give you to Dave.
♪ ♪
- To test the edge
of your blade
to see if it's retained
that edge,
I'll be cutting through
these water tubes.
Joe, Casey, you guys ready?
- Oh, yeah.
- Let's go for it.
♪ ♪
- Joe, Casey, your sword has
a great feel to it.
I like the shape of the grip.
But there's that section
where that edge is rolled,
and that's where
the cut started.
You can see that first tube
kinda crushed.
Then, it starts to cut,
as I get up into the sharper
section up in here.
By then, everything is
pushed over,
and kinda crushed
that last tube.
It's a beautiful piece.
Well done.
- Thanks.
- All right, Mark, Jessica,
you ready?
- Indeed.
- Yes.
- Okay.
♪ ♪
- Good job.
- So, Mark, Jessica,
you maintained
a bit more of an edge here.
As you can see,
that cut travels through there.
They're clean across the tops.
Didn't blow out
any of the tubes.
Didn't crush any of them.
Anyway, uh,
beautifully made piece.
It's definitely a cutter.
Nicely done.
- Thank you.
♪ ♪
- Bladesmiths, your Chinese Dao
have been tested,
and the judges have evaluated
the finer details of your work,
and they've made
their final decision.
The "Forged in Fire"
champions are...
♪ ♪
Mark and Jessica,
congratulations,
you are the "Forged in Fire"
champions.
Joe and Casey, your weapon
did not make the cut.
David Baker's
gonna tell you why.
- Joe, Casey, you brought us
back a Chinese Dao
that I personally
would be proud to own,
and it was a real
pleasure using it.
But in our kill test
on the boar carcass,
and on the sharpness test
on the water tubes,
your weapon just didn't perform
as well as your competitor,
and for that simple reason,
we've gotta let you go.
♪ ♪
- Joe, Casey,
please surrender your blade.
♪ ♪
- We lost fair and square...
- Mm-hmm.
- But I couldn't have asked
for a better week of learning.
- Casey's an amazing
apprentice.
I have no doubt he'll be
an amazing master also.
- Do I get a cap and gown?
- [chuckles] If I had one,
I'd give you one.
- Do I get a diploma
with the crayon written on it?
- Tell you what,
you get the stuff
and give it to me, and then
I'll give it back to you.
- Okay. Perfect.
♪ ♪
- Mark, Jessica,
you are our new
"Forged in Fire" champions,
and that's a title that comes
with a check for ten grand.
Congratulations.
- I'm blown away.
- It's that time.
Please present your weapon
to the judges.
- It's the finish of the
biggest roller coaster ever.
The training that Jessica
has gone through works,
and it can turn somebody
into one heck of a smith.
It's amazing.
- [chuckles]
- It's gonna take a while
for this to sink in,
without a doubt.
♪ ♪
[metallic clank]